US President Joe Biden says he's
outraged by Israel's killing of
international Aid workers in Gaza the
seven victims joined the nearly 200
Palestinian relief workers killed by
Israeli forces he's attacking eight
supplies one with the tactics in
Israel's jici side the war this is
Inside
Story
[Music]
hello welcome to the program I am Hashim
ahbar Israel made sure no one would
survive an attack targeting a clearly
marked Aid Convoy in Gaza on Monday an
Al jazer investigation has revealed
three missiles deliberately hit the
three vehicles in three separate strikes
by a drone killing a Palestinian and six
foreign citizens an outrage says US
President Joe Biden using words much
stronger than he used before about
Israel's actions in Gaza much stronger
than even after the killing of nearly
200 Palestinian Aid workers by Israel
not to mention people queuing for food
so why are such attacks happening so
often is it a deliberate strategy by
Israel to block Aid and therefore kill
more Palestinians and why such an attack
ATT now with the need for supplies at
its most critical and when people are
dying of starvation we'll get to our
guests in a moment first this report
from omum
Sharif mounting Global anger after
Israel kills 78 workers in Gaza on
Monday an aljazera investigation has
found three consecutive strikes
deliberately targeted the clearly
identified Convoy of international Aid
workers in deral Bala they worked for
the us-based organization world's
Central Kitchen it's prompted the
strongest condemnation yet from Israel's
closest Ally the United States in a
statement issued by the White House
President Joe Biden blamed Israel for
not doing enough to protect Aid workers
and civilians why is the US not
condemning the strike I I think by out
by saying we're outraged I think you can
fairly characterize that as condemning
the strike itself of course I mean
nobody wants to see the this kind of
violence happened to humanitarian Aid
workers Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu admitted his forces launched
the attack but says it was
unintentional there was a tragic
incident of an unintended strike of our
forces on innocent people in the Gaza
Strip this happens in war we are
checking this thoroughly we are in touch
with the governments and we will do
everything for this not to happen again
the Israeli military says it's
investigating the strikes that killed a
US Canadian dual Citizen and a
Australian a Polish national three
British citizens and a Palestinian but
it's further straining ties between
Israel and its allies this is completely
unacceptable uh the Israeli government
has accepted uh
responsibility uh for this the United
Nations says nearly 2008 workers have
been killed in the nearly 6 months since
Israel launched its war on Gaza most of
them are staff killed while operating in
areas considered safe the Israeli
military has been accused of blocking
Aid attacking eight convoys and even
starving civilians trying to get food
supplies this is
unable but it is an inevitable result of
the way the war is being conducted it
demonstrates yet again the urgent need
for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire
Monday's attack on the aid workers has
forced several Charities to suspend
their operations in Gaza in a major
setback for the Recently open seot food
Aid un agencies have been warning of
famine in Northern Gaza where Israel has
blocked aid from entering the rest of
the Palestinian territory is facing
catastrophic levels of
hunger the world Central Kitchen was
feeding many people providing them with
support without it people don't know
where to turn so there will definitely
be a lot of hunger the killing of
international charity workers has put
humanitarian supplies to the strip in
doubt while President Biden has
condemned Israel for killing of the aid
workers his administration continues to
arm and fund Israel's Relentless war on
Gaza um kulsum Sharif Al jazer for
Inside
[Music]
Story let's go to our panel now in
ramala we have Bushra khalidi policy
lead in the occupied Palestinian
territory and Israel for the a charity
Oxfam in London Chris gunnis a human
rights activist and former spokesman for
hona the United Nations relief and works
agency which supports Palestinian
refugees also in the occupied West Bank
s Bashi program director of Human Rights
Watch welcome to the program busha this
was the moment when people were hoping
that fight finally we'll see more Aid
workers delivering Aid into Gaza and
suddenly the attack took place in
clearly marked Vehicles run by the world
Central Kitchen what was your reaction
when you heard the news I mean of course
you know Israel's deliv targeting of all
aspects of life in Gaza is already
utterly unacceptable um but now with uh
this incident and the rise generally in
attacks against Aid workers is also
utterly un acceptable over you know the
past six months we've uh witnessed Oxfam
and other organizations that were you
know working closely on the ground with
an unprecedented assault on humanitarian
efforts with Israeli authorities
knowingly striking locations provided by
humanitarian teams uh for Aid delivery
and assistance and so it's clear no
one's safe in Gaza nowhere is safe in
Gaza and um Israel must stop its
egregious and systematic and continuous
violations of IHL
Chris as you know eight convoys
coordinate their movements with the Kat
which is a civilian body affiliated with
the Israeli uh Army now you've been in
touch with the world Central Kitchen do
we have to take the Israelis at face
value when they say this was a
misidentification we absolutely do not
and an investigation an impartial
investigation which Mr Netanyahu has
promised both RI sunak and Joe Biden
will Det determine whether that is the
case but let us look as at the facts as
we know them the Israelis were fully
cited on every millimeter of the Journey
of that Convoy the sea route from Cyprus
was established in full sight with
Israeli approval every inch of the road
that the Convoy went along from the
warehouse to the kitchens all of that
was notified and the transport the
actual vehicles and we're talking to
detail the vehicles were marked the
people in the vehicles were all notified
to the Israelis there was an attack on
the first vehicle and I'm told that what
happened is that people then left the
first vehicle those were alive and were
wounded but that could they went to the
second vehicle there are some reports
that the Israelis were notified that the
first vehicle had been hit then not long
afterwards the second vehicle had been
hit in was hit in spite of all the
notifications the bodies and those who
were able were brought to the Third
vehicle the Israelis again so it's
reported were notified about the strike
on the second vehicle
and lo and behold there was a strike on
the Third vehicle now Mr Netanyahu in
the clip that You' just played talk
about talked about an incident a strike
there weren't there were three strikes
Mr Netanyahu so to pretend that it was a
oneoff mistake no there were three of
them and that suggests that there is a
policy and you know you asked the
question in your headlines is there a
deliberate strategy a deliberate policy
of targeting these people I'm afraid
it's hard to conclude that there isn't
that clearly is there's a policy called
The Rules of Engagement which set out at
every level in the Israeli Army how they
engage with the Enemy how they um you
know the rules that determine who gets
fired on Etc and that policy has led to
tens of thousands of women and children
being killed and nearly 200 Aid workers
s the Israeli Army says it's going to
conduct a thoro impartial investigation
should we trust the findings when there
is no International oversight of this
investigation my concern is that this is
unfortunately far from the first time
the Israeli military has killed
humanitarian workers in Gaza um and also
struck ambulances and other clearly
marked humanitarian vehicles on a number
of occasions they've said that they
would conduct investigations in
particularly in particular of some of
the ambulance strikes and we have not
seen any results of those investigations
I'm also worried that they're saying
they will conduct investigations maybe
because the people killed were foreign
citizens uh particularly of Western
countries when 32,000 Palestinians have
been killed in Gaza the vast majority
women and children and we don't hear
about investigations into those deaths
so no I I am concerned that uh the
investigation is not something that
would be trustworthy and what we need is
for the international criminal court to
move more quickly in its investigation
into potential serious International
crimes committed both in Gaza the West
Bank and Israel Bu The world seems to
forget that almost 200 Brave relief
workers were killed in Gaza over the
last few months where does this all
leave the work of the NOS that have been
bravely operating on the ground to
deliver Aid to those who need it most I
mean yesterday's events again are not
isolated we're almost at 200 Aid workers
um killed including the UN workers um we
have 300 health workers from the
Palestinian Health Ministry that have
been killed we have uh almost 100
journalists killed and you know almost
15,000 children killed Gaz has become
the most dangerous place on Earth uh for
these you know groups of people um and
and it leaves us in a complete at a
complete Crossroads where we're having
to ask ourselves are we um abiding by
our duty of care and our principles as
humanitarian under international law um
in sending our colleagues to the field
and but you know we have those
conversations with our colleagues all
the time um and you know as to whether
we continue operations we scale up we
scale down you know this this is always
a conversation and an ongoing one uh
because this has been happening since
the beginning and this you know the risk
of of being killed in the field is
something that you know is is not new
again and so it's it's of course um the
impact of suspension of operations is I
mean massive at this stage uh I mean
with with starvation and and and and
famine likee conditions and famine
underway uh uh essentially um uh you
know Israel is using starvation again as
a weapon of War to collectively punish
an entire population um and and and
instead of letting us do our job
properly in accordance with
international law Chris when you look at
what world Central Kitchen has achieved
so far is really impressive compared to
what should Global players do so they
had their own Tugboat barge which
reached Gaza in mid-march and they were
able to prepare the landing area in the
northern Gaza and they started to
deliver Aid now with them suspending
their operations where does it leave the
north which has been suffering most in
the in the strip we have to put the
spotlight on where it should be and that
is the Israeli authorities the occupying
power because as we speak for the second
day in a row there have been no convoys
Israel is blocking un convoys there are
dozens of trucks at Rafa full of
hundreds of thousands of tons of food
and other Aid waiting to get in the UN
has notified the Israelis that it wants
these trucks to go in and Israel simply
has not approved them so you know yes
there has been considerable achievement
by Chef Andrea and the world Central
Kitchen and I applaud that but that in
no way takes the pressure of Israel as
the occupying power in compliance with
the provisional order from the
international court of justice to open
all of the borders and that there should
be unimpeded unrestricted humanitarian
access that the Israelis should be
cooperating with the United Nations the
security Council in its latest
resolution has also said the same thing
and as SAR has alluded to the ICC the
Rome statute is very clear that food
cannot be used as a weapon of War so
there's a triple violation the security
Council the icj and the Rome statute
Israel must be held to account what is
different this time is that for example
three British workers have been killed
and whereas before we had after the 2007
2008 Gaz of War we had the Goldstone
report and the Israelis Ed their scare
tactics and they crushed that and the
world buckled the Goldstone report it
was a bril Brant report was kicked into
the long grass yal disin the then head
of shinb went to raal and threatened
president abass he said we turn the West
Bank into Gaza if this report goes
forward so some pretty strong armed
tactics were used and the world buckled
this time however sunak has been told by
Netanyahu there will be an independent
investigation well I can tell you the
British media are all over this and
they're going to want to see that
independent investigation and guess what
they're going to want to see individual
Criminal
responsibility and that means the people
who killed these people are responsible
for the killing of these people are held
to criminal account they need to be
punished and that is something different
with the killing of these seven foreign
workers that there's a palting amongst
them and of course there has to be
accountability for him too but can I
just make one other point 171 unra
workers were killed Joe Biden picks up
the phone and says to Chef Andrea I'm
outraged it's disgraceful there must be
an imp independent investigation does he
pick up up the phone to commissioner
general lazarini or Secretary General
Antonio gutterz who say I'm outraged
that 171 under Palestinian workers have
been have been killed no he hasn't and
that's outrageous it's a double standard
and just as SAR said you know beyond
that um 32,000 Palestinians have been
killed each and every one of those has a
a dignity and a destiny that must be
investigated must be respected there
must be full accountability for all of
those killings uh s obviously when you
listen to these radio officials they're
trying to contain the ramifications from
the international outcry do you think
this could be a pivotal moment in this
sense it could rally International push
to hold the Israelis accountable for
what has been happening in Gaza over the
last few
months I certainly hope so um so just to
be clear um countries that are supplying
the Israeli military with arms like the
United States like Germany like the UK
risk being complicit in further grave
abuses if they continue doing so so
this can end pretty quickly if the
United States were to abide by its
obligations under international law as
well as under us domestic law and
suspend arms transfers to the Israeli
military that would be a very clear
message that unlawful strikes need to
end and that withholding and impeding
the delivery of humanitarian Aid need to
end us domestic law also forbids the
United States from supplying arms to
militaries that are blocking us supplied
humanitarian Aid so that makes sense if
men with guns are stopping you from
getting the aid that the United States
is providing the US should stop
providing those guns if those actions
are taken this could be a turning point
and I I really hope so because with
those ships lading with food turning
around back towards Cyprus and the truck
route still mostly closed people in Gaza
can't really wait much longer well this
comes against the backdrop of growing
International concerns about the
potential for more Aid in to Gaza and
Aid agencies are saying it's about time
to deliver Aid or thousands and
thousands of people could die Israeli
defense minister y Galan said on October
the 9th that nothing no eight will be
allowed into Gaza let's listen to what
he had to say I have ordered a Complete
Siege on the Gaza Strip there will be no
electricity no food no fuel everything
is closed we are fighting Human animals
and we
accordingly Bushra what's next for
humanitarian Aid into Gaza are we likely
to see more pressure on the NOS
organization that have been operating
there to say we have to pull out because
it's really
risky I mean I I I I you know the
context is ever evolving it and and is
is fastly changing um so we are you know
of course adaptive and flexible um um
you know what is what is incredible by
many of these organizations operating on
the ground and that been here for
decades um including oxam is that we
work through the local community so you
know our our operations are all mostly
through our local partners that are not
only humanitarian workers but they're
also members of the community they're
also trying to look for the next meal
for their kids and for their family um
and they're trying to survive every day
um and and so of course the pressure is
on them um um the pressure is uh uh and
so those conversations are ongoing um
but I I I surely hope that you know this
conversation has brought clearly what
needs to happen so that Aid can come in
um no you know uh creative ways of
delivering aid aid should be delivered
how it's always been delivered before
the 7th of October um uh in Gaza through
all of the routes the land routes that
are available because that would also
not make our Aid response so expensive
um and and also we need we need access
we need to be able to bring teams in um
and there's been persistent and
systematic denials also of permits and
visas we have an entire team in the West
Bank that could be also deployed to Gaza
we're not allowed to go to Gaza and
we're only an hour away um so there are
many solutions that could be tomorrow
activated at the will of is Israel and
its you know closest allies Chris the
World Central Kitchen accounts for more
than half of non un deliveries mostly
food to the people in Gaza they
delivered 43 million meals since October
they provide 50,000 hot meals on a daily
basis to the people all that is
gone what's next for the people Gaza and
you have to and you have to look at why
and the reason is that the Israelis are
not allowing food in I PID Ute to Oxfam
and I think what Bushra has said is
absolutely right their work is
extraordinary and if the Israelis let
them they could do more but to be clear
unra is the only organization the single
largest organization that can really
deliver Aid at scale there were before
the war 1.2 million people on unr's food
distribution list that figure will have
risen exponentially it's probably
somewhere near a two million by now they
simply don't have the data but the fact
is that unra has now gone through
something of resurgence you have this
Israeli attack you have the defunding by
certain donors they're all now coming
back anra has worked through this the
Israel's tried to isolate anra and anra
again has now got support from un
agencies and is looking to move forward
to deliver Aid at scale as the icj has
demanded and what is happening Israel is
continuing to block the aid there are
hundreds of trucks waiting at Rafa to
get in so looking forward unra can
deliver we've now got a situation where
the donors have come back the dodgy
dossier which the Israelis produce with
these false allegations against unra
staff members that's all Fallen away we
don't know there's no evidence of that
whatsoever unra has really come back now
and I PID tribute to unra for picking
itself up and it's now in a position
where it could deliver Aid at scale you
need to ask the Israelis now because the
the Biden Administration is very clear
sunak is very clear all of the UNR
donors are clear the international court
of justice is clear the ICC is clear all
of those mechanisms are clear that
Israel has to allow Aid to be delivered
at scale anra is the main organization
that can do that and if that does not
happen will be will be accused and will
be rightfully accused of genocide and
using starvation Mass starvation as a
weapon of war the world simply cannot
allow Israel to get away with doing that
lives of 2.3 million people today are at
stake sori as well as you work with
Human Rights Watch you co-founded the
Israel Human Rights group gisha which
has been campaigning for freedom of
movement of Palestinians and also for
aid for the Palestinian people for years
the nature of the blockade or blocking
the access to the people in Gaza now how
does it compare with past experiences
with past
years I mean in some cases it's
unprecedented um in the in the five Wars
that have taken place since 2008 the
Israeli military has never blocked Ed
water fuel electricity in the way that
it is done now and it has always allowed
Aid shipments in um even during a very
significant fighting and they saw that
as something they needed to do in the
International Community held them
accountable for that in some ways there
is a precedent um because there was a
period of time when the Israeli military
counted the number of calories that it
would allow people in Gaza to consume um
as part of a a policy to deliberately
restrict people in Gaza to know more
than that but this goes well below it in
other words the Israeli military has
calculations about how much food people
in Gaza need and it knows very well that
we're going well below that maybe back
in 2008 when the Israeli military first
began restricting Food Supplies into
Gaza albeit not at this level maybe if
the response had been stronger they
wouldn't have been encouraged to take it
to this next step which is actually
using starvation as a weapon of War Bush
oxam May find itself in a position where
it has to team up with other NOS to
deliver Aid how does it really feel it
feels like you know you're sending your
colleagues into a battlefield and
everywhere is a battlefield in Gaza uh
there's been you know it's not localized
there's it's it's and it's it's it's
systematic and has been Relentless um I
wanted to add another point you know
it's not just about food um it's about
every aspect of life um when you're when
you reach the starvation level you don't
need you don't need just food you need
um nutrients you need health care you
need a doctor you need to be
systematically seeing and consistently
seeing a doctor um and that's not
available in Gaza you we need to clear
the rubble um we can't deliver Aid when
there's no roads um and so instead of
for example uh building a 250 million uh
you know uh floating Port um we should
be using that to get Machinery in that
Gaza does not have to clear the amount
of rubble that could take up to two
years actually to clear out um I mean
effectively what we need right now is a
complete permanent ceasefire so that we
can do our job uh we actually not only
operate through local Partners we
actually operate through Ona as well um
we have we provide trainings in Ona
shelters we use Ona warehouses so I
completely agree with my colleague we
cannot do this without the onwa
humanitarian arm that has been also
operating in Gaza for decades and knows
the communities we are the experts and
we are there on the ground um and so I
don't think I don't see us leaving uh
Gaza in that way because we we form part
of the community yeah Chis in less than
a minute if you don't mind in the
absence of strong indications of a
ceasefire a deal between Hamas and the
Israelis with a situation evolving on
the ground do you still believe there
could be a breakthrough well I certainly
pray there is a breakthrough but there's
so much internal division within Israel
about the strategy is the strategy to
defeat Hamas is the strategy to bring
the hostages out and this is the problem
that these crimes are going on there's
Mass starvation in Gaza and as ever the
fate of Gaza is held hostage forgive the
expression um by internal Israeli
politics and until that can be clarified
there will be f confusion but to be very
clear the buck stops with Mr Netanyahu
has invoked the amalec biblical genocide
with President Herzog who has said that
you can't distinguish between ordinary
civilians and Hamas um and your a Galant
who said you know there'll be a complete
as you had in your clip a complete
blockade and these people have to be
held to individual criminal account
whatever happens with the hostages we
have to see all of the borders open we
have to see those responsible held to
criminal account S we're not really
hearing strong voices in Israel
condemning what is happening
particularly from a purely legal
perspective I mean there there are some
voices um there's right now a petition
in the Israeli Supreme Court from a
number of human rights groups um calling
for the Israeli military to allow Aid
into Gaza and to actually Supply it
which is part of its obligations as
occupying power we have seen
demonstrations and posts from people
calling making similar calls I think
that um you know there there's been a
lot of inconsistency So within Israel
people were appropriately horrified by
the October 7th Hamas Le attacks that
killed so many civilians in southern
Israel and the outrage comes from the
fact that armed groups were targeting
civilians but that principle has to
apply irrespective of whether the
civilians or Israeli or Palestinian so
when the Israeli military is withholding
uh food from civilians and God
that has to spark the same amount of
outrage both in Israel as well as among
Israeli allies we have to leave it there
really appreciate your Insight s Bashi
Chris gunnes bushar KH looking forward
to having the same conversation with you
in the near future thank
you and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website Al ja.com for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story you can
also join the ation on X our handed is
at AJ Insight story from me has and the
entire team here in Doha livee for
now